# Kanu_Liver_scRNA

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is an essentially incurable disease, characterized either by advanced stage at diagnosis, or by recurrence and metastatic progression in patients who initially present with localized disease and are treated with curative intent.  The liver is the most common site of metastatic disease both at diagnosis and for post-treatment recurrence, with hepatic metastases driving survival outcomes in most cases.  Liver metastases tend to occur earlier than metastases to other sites, and patients with liver metastases have the worst survival outcomes, including in patients with multisite disease.  While liver metastases can be effectively treated in other gastrointestinal malignancies, treatment options for patients with PDAC that has metastasized to the liver are extremely limited. Taken together, there is a critical need to advance therapeutic strategies with the potential to prevent and target liver metastases, which first requires an improvement in our fundamental understanding of the processes driving hepatic metastasis.

The formation of a “premetastatic niche,” whereby a distant organ is primed for metastatic dissemination by either intrinsic features or extrinsic signals, has been proposed to explain the preferential homing and successful uptake of metastatic cells within specific sites. However, the mechanisms underlying and driving these changes remain nebulous.  The liver at baseline exhibits immunosuppressive properties such as immune tolerance during organ transplantation even in the absence of systemic immune suppression.  In the setting of cancer, this may be further exacerbated through remodeling of the hepatic immune landscape by recruitment of myeloid cells and other immunosuppressive populations.  Historically, it has been challenging to probe the role of individual cell types and their interactions within complex microenvironments, but recent improvements in high-throughput sequencing at single-cell resolution now allow for these types of studies at scale. Still, investigation of the premetastatic liver immune compartment in the context of human PDAC remains largely unstudied, due chiefly to the lack of appropriate tissue resources (i.e. “normal” liver samples in patients at high risk for metastatic spread). Thus, our limited understanding of the premetastatic hepatic immune niche comes almost exclusively from animal models.

To address this deficit, we developed a unique biobanking effort to obtain these necessary tissue samples from PDAC patients without detectable metastatic disease undergoing curative-intent surgery. We established a platform to profile immunity at single-cell resolution across multiple sites, including the primary PDAC tumor, the peripheral blood, and the premetastatic liver.  Leveraging these biospecimens, we applied paired single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) and T cell receptor sequencing (scTCR-seq) to define with unprecedented granularity the immune composition and phenotypes observed across the tissue sites most relevant to primary and metastatic PDAC. We show functional differences between cell types in these tissues and apply published gene signatures to predict potential neoantigen-specific, tumor-reactive T cells in primary PDAC18. This represents a reproducible platform that is currently being applied within existing clinical trials and protocols to generate personalized cellular therapies for patients with PDAC.  
